The General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, met in Paris for its fourteenth session, this fourth day of November 1966, being the twentieth anniversary of the foundation of the Organization, 

Recalling that the Constitution of the Organization declares that `since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the defenses of peace must be constructed' and that the peace must be founded, if it is not to fail, upon the intellectual and moral solidarity of mankind, 

Recalling that the Constitution also states that the wide diffusion of culture and the education of humanity for justice and liberty and peace are indispensable to the dignity of man and constitute a sacred duty which all the nations must fulfill in a spirit of mutual assistance and concern, 

Considering that the Organization's Member States, believing in the pursuit of truth and the free exchange of ideas and knowledge, have agreed and determined to develop and to increase the means of communication between their peoples, 

Considering that, despite the technical advances which facilitate the development and dissemination of knowledge and ideas, ignorance of the way of life and customs of peoples still presents an obstacle to friendship among the nations, to peaceful co-operation and to the progress of mankind, 

Taking account of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Declaration of the Rights of the Child, the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial Discrimination, the Declaration on the Promotion among Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and Understanding between Peoples, and the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States and the Protection of their Independence and Sovereignty, proclaimed successively by the General Assembly of the United Nations, 

Convinced by the experience of the Organization's first twenty years that, if international cultural co-operation is to be strengthened its principles require to be affirmed, 

Proclaims this Declaration of the principles of international cultural co-operation, to the end that governments, authorities, organizations, associations and institutions responsible for cultural activities may constantly be guided by these principles; and for the purpose, as set out in the Constitution of the Organization, of advancing, through the educational, scientific and cultural relations of the peoples of the world, the objectives of peace and welfare that are defined in the Charter of the United Nations 


Article I 

1. Each culture has a dignity and value which must be respected and preserved. 

2. Every people has the right and the duty to develop its culture. 

3. In their rich variety and diversity, and in the reciprocal influences they exert on one another, all cultures form part of the common heritage belonging to all mankind. 

Article II  

Nations shall endeavour to develop the various branches of culture side by side and, as far as possible, simultaneously, so as to establish a harmonious balance between technical progress and the intellectual and moral advancement of mankind.

Article III  

International cultural co-operation shall cover all aspects of intellectual and creative activities relating to education, science and culture. 

Article IV 

The aims of international cultural co-operation in its various forms, bilateral or multilateral; regional or universal, shall be:  

1. To spread knowledge, to stimulate talent and to enrich cultures; 

2. To develop peaceful relations and friendship among the peoples and bring about a better understanding of each other's way of life; 

3. To contribute to the application of the principles set out in the United Nations Declarations that are recalled in the Preamble to this Declaration; 

4. To enable, everyone to have access to knowledge, to enjoy the arts and literature f all peoples, to share in advances made in science in all parts of the world and in the resulting benefits, and to contribute to the enrichment of cultural life; 

5. To raise the level of the spiritual and material life of man in all parts of the world. 

Article V  

Cultural co-operation is a right and a duty for all peoples and all nations, which should share with one another their knowledge and skills. 

Article VI  

International co-operation, while promoting the enrichment of all cultures through its beneficent action, shall respect the distinctive character of each.

Article VII  

1. Broad dissemination of ideas and knowledge, based on the freest exchange and discussion, is essential to creative activity, the pursuit of truth and the development of the personality. 

2. In cultural co-operation, stress shall be laid on ideas and values conducive to the creation of a climate of friendship and peace. Any mark of hostility in attitudes and in expression of opinion shall be avoided. Every effort shall be made, in presenting and disseminating information, to ensure its authenticity. 

Article VIII  

Cultural co-operation shall be carried on for the mutual benefit of all the nations practicing it. Exchanges to which it gives rise shall be arranged in a spirit of broad reciprocity. 

Article IX 

Cultural co-operation shall contribute to the establishment of stable, long-term relations between peoples, which-should be subjected as little as possible to the strains which may arise in international life. 

Article X  

Cultural co-operation shall be specially concerned with the moral and intellectual education of young people in a spirit of friendship, international understanding and peace and shall foster awareness among States of the need to stimulate talent and promote the training of the rising generations in the most varied sectors.

Article XI  

1. In their cultural relations, States shall bear in mind the principles of the United Nations. In seeking to achieve international co-operation, they shall respect the sovereign equality of States and shall refrain from intervention in matters which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State. 

2. The principles of this Declaration shall be applied with due regard for human rights and fundamental freedoms.