The General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, meeting in Paris from 24 October to 28 November 1978, at its twentieth session, 

Considering that, by virtue of Article IV, paragraph 4 of the Constitution, it is for the Organization to draw up and adopt instruments for the international regulation of questions falling within its competence, 

Considering that Article VIII of the Constitution provides, inter alia, that each Member State shall report to the Organization, at intervals and in a manner to be determined by the General Conference, on its laws, regulations and statistics relating to educational, scientific and cultural life and institutions, 

Convinced that it is highly desirable for the national authorities responsible for collecting and communicating statistics relating to science and technology to be guided by certain standards in the matter of definitions, classifications and presentation, in order to improve the international comparability of such statistics, 

Recognizing that the efforts made by Member States to develop science and technology will contribute to strengthening peace and security in the world, 

Convinced that co-operation in this field would also advance economic and social progress, 

Having before it, as item 34 of the agenda of the session, proposals concerning the international standardization of statistics relating to science and technology, 

Having decided at its nineteenth session that this question should be made the subject of an international regulation, to take the form of a recommendation to Member States within the meaning of Article IV, paragraph 4, of the Constitution, 

Adopts the present recommendation this 27th day of November 1978. 


The General Conference recommends that Member States should ,apply the following provisions concerning international standardization of statistics relating to science and technology, by taking whatever legislative measures or other steps may be required, in conformity with the constitutional practice of each State, to give effect, within their respective territories, to the standards and principles formulated in this recommendation. 

The General Conference recommends that Member States bring this recommendation to the attention of authorities and services responsible for collecting  and communicating statistics relating to science and technology: 

The General Conference recommends that Member States forward to it, by the dates and in the form which it shall prescribe, reports concerning action taken by them upon this recommendation. 

I. Scope and definitions 

Scope  

1. This recommendation relates to statistics designed to provide standardized information in each Member State on certain scientific and technological (S&T) activities, and particularly on research and experimental development (R&D). These statistics should cover all national institutions that perform or finance such activities. 

Definitions  

2. In compiling the statistics covered by this recommendation, the following definitions should be used: 

2.1 Scientific and technological activities (STA): systematic activities which are closely concerned with the generation, advancement, dissemination, and application of scientific and technical knowledge in all fields of science and technology. These include such activities as R&D, scientific and technological education and training (STET) and the scientific and technological services (STS), defined in paragraphs (a) to (c) below.

(a) Research and experimental development:  any systematic and creative work undertaken in order to increase the stock of knowledge, including knowledge of man, culture and society, and the use of this knowledge to devise new applications. In most fields several categories may be distinguished: 

(aa) Scientific research activities : any systematic and creative activities aimed at increasing the stock of scientific knowledge and applying it in practice. 

Scientific research activities in the natural sciences, technology, and the medical and agricultural sciences: Any systematic and creative activities designed to ascertain the links between, and the nature of, natural phenomena, to generate knowledge of the laws of nature and to contribute to the practical application of this knowledge of laws, forces and substances. 

Scientific research activities in the social sciences and humanities: Any systematic and creative activity aimed at increasing or improving knowledge of man, culture and society, including use of such knowledge for the solution of social and human problems. 

In most fields of science, research may be classified as either fundamental or applied: 

(i) Fundamental research: experimental or theoretical work undertaken primarily to acquire new knowledge of the underlying foundations of phenomena and observable facts, without any particular or specific application or use in view. 

(ii) Applied research: original investigation undertaken in order to acquire new knowledge. It is, however, directed primarily towards a specific practical aim or objective. 

(bb) 